As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples with an ass and a colt, both having Mary sitting upon them; and his disciples took out the money bags and threw them onto the beasts. As he approached Bethphage and Bethany at the hill called the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples, saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and just as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. Untie it and bring it here. If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ tell him, ‘The Lord needs it and will send it back here shortly.’” Those who were sent ahead went and found a colt outside in the street, tied at a doorway, just as he had told them, and as they were untying the colt its owners asked them, “What are you doing, untying that colt?” They replied as Jesus had told them to, and the people let them go. They brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt and put Jesus on it. A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road as he went along. When he came near the place where the road goes down the Mount of Olives, Jesus was brought a colt and cloaks were thrown over it as many people spread their cloaks on the road while others spread branches they had cut in the fields. The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” Those who went ahead and those who followed shouted, "Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!" “Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! Hosanna in the highest!” Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to Jesus, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples!” “I tell you,” he replied, “if they keep quiet, the stones will cry out.” As he approached Jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it for all the miracles they had seen: "Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!" The individual stated, “If you, even you, had only known on this day what would bring you peace—but now it is hidden from your eyes.” Jesus entered Jerusalem and went to the temple, where he looked around at everything, but since it was already late, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve. The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side, and they will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another, because you did not recognize the time of God's coming to you. The next day as they were leaving Bethany, Jesus was hungry. Seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to find out if it had any fruit. When he reached it, he found nothing but leaves, because it was not the season for figs. It happened as they were leaving Bethany, and as he approached the tree, he discovered that it bore no fruit, despite its leaves. When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?” The crowds answered, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee,” and then he said to the tree, “May no one ever eat fruit from you again.” His disciples heard him say it. Then he entered the temple area and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves, and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts. The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them. “It is written,” he said to them, “‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’” Every day he was teaching at the temple, but the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the leaders among the people were trying to kill him. Yet they could not find any way to do it, because all the people hung on his words; when the chief priests and the teachers of the law saw the wonderful things he did and the children shouting in the temple area, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant, "Do you hear what these children are saying?" they asked him. Yes, replied Jesus, “have you never read, “‘From the lips of children and infants you have ordained praise’?” The chief priests and the teachers of the law heard this and began looking for a way to kill him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed at his teaching. When evening came, they went out of the city and he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where he spent the night. Early in the morning, as he was on his way back to the city, he was hungry. Accounts vary regarding the precise sequence of events; some indicate that this occurred immediately upon his departure, while others suggest it arose later during his journey. In the morning, as they went along, he saw a fig tree by the road and approached it, finding only leaves upon its branches. He then said to the tree, “May you never bear fruit again!” Immediately the tree withered, extending this effect down to its roots, and when the disciples witnessed this rapid withering, they were amazed and asked, "How did the fig tree wither so quickly?" Peter remembered and said to Jesus, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree you cursed has withered!” Jesus answered, “Have faith in God,” and then stated, “I tell you the truth, if anyone says to this mountain, ‘Go, throw yourself into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him. Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.” And when you stand praying, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father in heaven may forgive you your sins. See Footnote. One day as he was teaching the people in the temple courts and preaching the gospel, the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the elders came up to him, and they asked, “By what authority are you doing these things? And who gave you this authority?” Jesus replied, “I will also ask you one question. If you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.” John’s baptism—where did it come from? Was it from heaven, or from men? Was it from heaven, or from men? Tell me! “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Then why didn’t you believe him?’ But if we say, ‘From men’—we are afraid of the people, for everyone held that John really was a prophet,” they discussed it among themselves. “We don’t know” they answered Jesus, and Jesus said, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.” The question arose: “John’s baptism--was it from heaven, or from men?” They discussed it among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Why didn’t you believe him?’ But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people would stone us, because they were persuaded that John was a prophet.” So they answered Jesus, “We don’t know,” and he said, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.” There was a man who had two sons, and he went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work today in the vineyard,’ while simultaneously stating, “What do you think?” He answered, “I will not,” but later he changed his mind and went. The event occurred in a large room with many people present, and a single object was placed on a table. A man approached the table and picked up the object, examining it closely before moving it to a different location within the room. He then turned and answered, “I will not,” but later he changed his mind and went. A man approached his two sons and instructed them to go to the field and return with a donkey. The father then went to the other son and said the same thing. He answered, ‘I will, sir,’ but he did not go. Which of the two did what his father wanted? They answered, ‘The first.’ Jesus said to them, “I tell you the truth, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you. For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.” He then began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a winepress in it and built a watchtower. Then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey. At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants to collect from them some of the fruit of the vineyard. But they seized him, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.” When the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit, and the tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third. He went on to tell the people this parable: A man planted a vineyard, rented it to some farmers and went away for a long time. At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants so they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed. He sent another servant, but that one also they beat and treated shamefully and sent away empty-handed. He sent still a third, and they wounded him and threw him out. The owner of the vineyard then sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way. Last of all, he sent his son to them, ‘They will respect my son,’ he said, and the owner of the vineyard said, “What shall I do? I will send my son, whom I love; perhaps they will respect him.” Then he sent another servant to them; they struck this man on the head and treated him shamefully. He sent still another, and that one they killed. He sent many others; some of them they beat, others they killed. “He had one left to send, a son, whom he loved. He sent him last of all, saying, ‘They will respect my son,’ but the tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’ So they took him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.” What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others. Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants? They replied that he will bring those wretches to a wretched end, and he will rent the vineyard to other tenants, who will give him his share of the crop at harvest time. When the people heard this, they said, “May this never be!” Jesus said to them, "Have you never read in the Scriptures: 'The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone; the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes'?" Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit. He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed. Jesus looked directly at them and asked, “Then what is the meaning of that which is written: “‘The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone’?” He continued, “Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed.” When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard Jesus’ parables, they knew he was talking about them and looked for a way to arrest him immediately, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet. Then they left him and went away because they knew he had spoken the parable against them; but they were still afraid of the crowd. The teachers of the law and the chief priests looked for a way to arrest him immediately, because they knew he had spoken this parable against them. Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying: “The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son. He sent his servants to those who had been invited to the banquet to tell them to come, but they refused to come.” Then he sent some more servants and said, ‘Tell those who have been invited that I have prepared my dinner: My oxen and fattened cattle have been butchered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.’ But they paid no attention and went off—one to his field, another to his business. The rest seized his servants, mistreated them and killed them. The king was enraged, and he sent his army and destroyed those murderers and burned their city. Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding banquet is ready, but those I invited did not deserve to come,’ and he instructed them to go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone they found. The servants went out into the streets and gathered all the people they could find, both good and bad, and the wedding hall was filled with guests. When the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes. ‘Friend,’ he asked, ‘how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ The man was speechless. Then the king told the attendants, ‘Tie him hand and foot, and throw him outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ For many are invited, but few are chosen. Then the Pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him in his words, sending their disciples along with the Herodians to Jesus. “Teacher,” they said, “we know you are a man of integrity and that you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth; you aren’t swayed by men because you pay no attention to who they are. Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not? Should we pay or shouldn't we?” But Jesus knew their hypocrisy, asking, “Why are you trying to trap me? Bring me a denarius and let me look at it.” They brought the coin, and he asked them, “Whose portrait is this? And whose inscription? Caesar’s,” they replied. Keeping a close watch on him, they sent spies who pretended to be honest, hoping to catch Jesus in something he said so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor. The spies questioned him: “Tell us then, what is your opinion? Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not?” But Jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, “You hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me? Show me the coin used for paying the tax.” They brought him a denarius, and he asked them, “Whose portrait is this? And whose inscription?” Then Jesus said to them, “Give to Caesar what is Caesar’s and to God what is God’s,” and they replied, “Caesar’s.” He then said to them, “Give to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.” When they heard this, they were amazed, so they left him and went away. They were unable to trap him in what he had said there in public, and astonished by his answer, they became silent. That same day, some of the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question. “Teacher,” they said, “Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother. Now there were seven brothers; the first one married a woman and died childless, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother. The same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh, and the woman eventually died too. The second one married the widow, but he also died, leaving no child. It was the same with the third. In fact, none of the seven left any children. Then the Sadducees asked, “Teacher,” they said, “Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother. At the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?” And then the third married her, and in the same way the seven died, leaving no children. Finally, the woman died too. Jesus replied, “Are you not in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God?” Now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her? Jesus replied, “You are in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God. At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven. But about the resurrection of the dead--have you not read what God said to you, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.” The people of this age marry and are given in marriage, but those who are considered worthy of taking part in that age and in the resurrection from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage, and they can no longer die; for they are like the angels. They are God’s children, since they are children of the resurrection. But in the account of the bush, even Moses showed that the dead rise, for he calls the Lord ‘the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’ He is not the God of the dead When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching, and some of the teachers of the law responded, “Well said, teacher!” And no one dared to ask him any more questions. Hearing that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, the Pharisees got together and one of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this question: “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?” Jesus replied: “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’ This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ When the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven. Now about the dead rising—have you not read in the book of Moses, in the account of the bush, how God said to him, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are badly mistaken! One of the teachers of the law came and heard them debating, and noticing that Jesus had given them a good answer, he asked him, “Of all the commandments, which is the most important?” “The most important one,” answered Jesus, “is this: ‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one. Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.’ The second is this: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no commandment greater than these,” he stated. “Well said, teacher,” the man replied. “You are right in saying that God is one and there is no other but him. To love him with all your heart, with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.” All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments, while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They replied, “The son of David,”. “How is it then,” he said to them, “that David, speaking by the Spirit, calls him ‘Lord’?” and he continued, “For he says, ‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.’” Then Jesus responded, “How is it that they say the Christ is the Son of David? David himself declares in the Book of Psalms: ‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.’” David called him ‘Lord,’ and then questioned how he could be his son, stating “How then can he be his son?” No one could say a word in reply, and from that day on no one dared to ask him any more questions; when Jesus saw that he had answered wisely, he said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” While all the people were listening, Jesus said to his disciples, and then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples. The teachers of the law and the Pharisees sat in Moses’ seat, instructing that one must obey them and do everything they told them, yet cautioned against mirroring their actions, noting they did not practice what they preached. They were observed tying up heavy loads and placing them on men's shoulders, but themselves refused to lift a finger to move them, and everything they did was done for men to see, including the wide phylacteries they wore and the long tassels on their garments, as well as their preference for the place of honor at banquets and important seats in the synagogues, and their desire to be greeted in the marketplaces with the title ‘Rabbi.’ Jesus approached the group of men and said, “But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have only one Master and you are all brothers. And do not call anyone on earth ‘father,’ for you have one Father, and he is in heaven. Nor are you to be called ‘teacher,’ for you have one Teacher, the Christ. The greatest among you will be your servant. For whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.” Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You shut the kingdom of heaven in men’s faces. The statement was made directly to you, and a footnote was referenced. Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You traveled over land and sea to win a single convert, and when he became one, you made him twice as much a son of hell as you were. The initial encounter occurred in a small coastal town where a traveler was approached by an individual seeking guidance. This led to extensive discussions and debates, ultimately resulting in the individual becoming a follower. However, upon this conversion, the teachers of the law and Pharisees expressed profound disapproval, labeling the convert as “a son of hell.” Woe to you, blind guides! You say, “If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath,” you blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred? You also say, “If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is bound by his oath.” You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred? Therefore, he who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it. And he who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it. While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, “How is it that the teachers of the law say that the Christ is the son of David? David himself, speaking by the Holy Spirit, declared: “‘The Lord said to my Lord: "Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet."' And he who swears by heaven swears by God’s throne and by the one who sits on it. “Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites!” he declared, “You give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cummin. But you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former. You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.” David himself calls him ‘Lord.’ How then can he be his son? The large crowd listened to him with delight as he taught, warning them to watch out for the teachers of the law who like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets. They devour widows’ houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. Such men will be punished most severely; beware of them. Blind Pharisee! He first declared, “First clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean,” while proclaiming, “Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of dead men’s bones and everything unclean. In the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.” He continued, “Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous. And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’ So you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.” Fill up, then, the measure of the sin of your forefathers! “You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?” Therefore I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers. Some of them you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town. As Jesus sat down opposite the place where the offerings were put and watched the crowd putting their money into the temple treasury, many rich people threw in large amounts. He also saw a poor widow put in two very small copper coins, worth only a fraction of a penny. Calling his disciples to him, Jesus said, “I tell you the truth, this poor widow has put more into the treasury than all the others. They all gave out of their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything—all she had to live on.” And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar. I tell you the truth, all this will come upon this generation. Some of his disciples were remarking about how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and with gifts dedicated to God, while Jesus said, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing. Look, your house is left to you desolate. For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’” As Jesus left the temple, either as he was walking away or prompted by a disciple’s observation of the massive stones and magnificent buildings, he stated, “Do you see all these things?” and replied, “I tell you the truth, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.” As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, “Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are all about to be fulfilled?” As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately and asked, “Tell us, when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?” He warned them to watch out that no one deceives them, for many would come in his name, claiming, ‘I am he,’ and would deceive many. He further explained that they would hear of wars and rumors of wars, but should not be alarmed, as such things must happen, and the end was still to come; nation would rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, there would be famines and earthquakes in various places, all being the beginning of birth pains. “Teacher,” they asked, “when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are about to take place?” He replied: “Watch out that you are not deceived. For many will come in my name, claiming, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The time is near.’ Do not follow them.” When you hear of wars and revolutions, do not be frightened, as these things must happen first, but the end will not come right away. When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed, for such things must happen, and the end is still to come; nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, accompanied by earthquakes in various places and famines, which are the beginning of birth pains. You must be on your guard, as you will be handed over to the local councils and flogged in the synagogues, and on account of you, you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them, while the gospel must first be preached to all nations. Whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand about what to say, but just say whatever is given you at the time, for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit; brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child, and children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death. Then he said to them: There will be great earthquakes, famines and pestilences in various places, and fearful events and great signs from heaven. But before all this, they will lay hands on you and persecute you; they will deliver you to synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors, and all on account of my name. This will result All men will hate you because of me, and you will be handed over to be persecuted and put to death by all nations, resulting in many turning away from the faith and betraying each other, with false prophets appearing to deceive many people; at that time, the love of most will grow cold, and you will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death. However, not a hair of your head will perish, and he who stands firm to the end will be saved. When you see Jerusalem being surrounded by armies, you will know that its desolation is near, and this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come. And so when you see standing in the holy place ‘the abomination that causes desolation,’ spoken of through the prophet Daniel—let the reader understand— Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city get out, and let those in the country not enter the city. For this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written. How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers! There will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people. They will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled on by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. “There will be signs in the sun, moon and stars. On the earth, nations will be in anguish and perplexity at the roaring and tossing of the sea. Men will faint from terror, apprehensive of what is coming on the world, for the heavenly bodies will be shaken. Then let no one on the roof of his house go down to take anything out of the house, nor let no one in the field go back to get his cloak. Pray that this will not take place in winter. Pray that your flight will not take place in winter or on the Sabbath. The aircraft was approaching the runway when a sudden and violent gust of wind struck it, causing it to veer sharply off course. Passengers reported a loud bang followed by a brief period of darkness, and the pilot immediately initiated emergency procedures. The crew attempted to regain control but the aircraft continued its descent at an alarming rate, impacting the ground with considerable force. Following the impact, there was a rapid loss of pressure and smoke filled the cabin. Because those will be days of distress unequaled from the beginning of the world until now—and never to be equaled again—if the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would survive, but for the sake of the elect those days will be shortened. At that time if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or, ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe it, for false Christs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and miracles to deceive even the elect—if that were possible; See, I have told you ahead of time. “But in those days, following that distress, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light.” Wherever it originates, such as lightning coming from the east being visible even in the west, so too will be the coming of the Son of Man. And wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather. At that time men will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory, and he will send his angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens. Immediately after the distress of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken. At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. When these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near. He told them this parable: “Look at the fig tree and all the trees.” Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near. When they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near. Even so, when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the door. I tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened; heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. Be careful, or your hearts will be weighed down with dissipation, drunkenness and the anxieties of life, and that day will close on you unexpectedly like a trap. For it will come upon all those who live on the face of the whole earth; for it will come upon all those who live on the face of the whole earth. Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the Son of Man. Each day Jesus was teaching at the temple, and each evening he went out to spend the night on the hill called the Mount of Olives. And all the people came early in the morning to hear him at the temple, as they had done previously, though some accounts suggest a shift in timing; it was reported that many arrived before dawn, while others indicated a gathering commenced shortly after sunrise, both seeking to listen to his words within the temple’s walls. No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. As it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man: for in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day Noah entered the ark; and they knew nothing about what would happen until the flood came and took them all away. Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left. Two women will be grinding with a hand mill; one will be taken and the other left. Be on guard! Be alert! You do not know when that time will come; it’s like a man going away: He leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with his assigned task, and tells the one at the door to keep watch. Therefore keep watch, because you do not know on what day your Lord will come. If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into. The Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him, and you must also be ready; “Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of the servants in his household to give them their food at the proper time?” So you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him. It will be good for that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns. I tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions. But suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, ‘My master is staying away a long time,’ and does not keep watch over the other slaves, nor try to make them work, nor to stop them from laughing and playing; then when the master returns, he has earned only his master’s scorn. He began to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards, and as a result, the situation escalated significantly, leading to a confrontation involving multiple individuals and ultimately resulting in considerable disruption within the establishment. The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of; he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were foolish and five were wise. The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them, while the wise, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps. The bridegroom was a long time in coming, and they all became drowsy and fell asleep. Therefore keep watch because you do not know when the owner of the house will come back—whether in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or at dawn. At midnight the cry rang out: ‘Here’s the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’ If he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping. What I say to you, I say to everyone: 'Watch!' Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps. The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’ “No,” they replied, “there may not be enough for both us and you. Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.” But while they were on their way to buy the oil, the bridegroom arrived, and the virgins who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet. The door was shut. Later the others also came, saying ‘Sir! Sir!’ and demanding that he open the door for them. “But he replied, ‘I tell you the truth, I don’t know you,’” and therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour. Again, it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted his property to them.” Upon entrusting five talents of money to one individual, two talents to another, and a single talent to a third, all in accordance with their respective capabilities, the person initiated a journey. The man who had received the five talents immediately set about putting his money to work and subsequently gained five more. Similarly, the one with the two talents gained two additional talents. However, the man who had received the single talent departed and dug a hole in the ground where he then hid his master’s money. After a long time, the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them. The man who had received the five talents brought the other five, stating, ‘Master, you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.’ His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master’s happiness!’ The man with the two talents also came, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted me with two talents; see, I have gained two more.’ His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master’s happiness!’ Then the man who had received the one talent came forward and said, ‘Master,’ he said, ‘I knew that you are a hard man, harvesting where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed. So I was afraid and went out and hid your talent in the ground. See, here is what belongs to you.’ His master replied, 'You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed?' Well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when I returned I would have received it back with interest. The master instructed the one who had ten talents to invest them and return with double, stating that everyone who has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him. He then ordered that the worthless servant should be thrown outside, into the darkness, where there would be weeping and gnashing of teeth. When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit on his throne in heavenly glory, and all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, putting the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, and I did not know you but you accepted me anyway, whatever you did to one of these least brothers of mine, you did to me.’” “I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me.’ Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?’ When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you? The woman stated that she had been approached by a man who asked her when he had last seen her as a stranger and if he had invited her in, or if he needed to clothe her and she had clothed her. Six days before the Passover, Jesus arrived at Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. Here a dinner was given in Jesus’ honor, and Martha served, while Lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him. Then Mary took about a pint of pure nard, an expensive perfume; she poured it on Jesus’ feet and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was then filled with the fragrance of the perfume. But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected, “Why wasn’t this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? It was worth a year’s wages,” and he did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it. “Leave her alone,” Jesus replied, and as he spoke, a young woman poured out the expensive ointment of nard over him, spreading it liberally on his head as he sat at a table in Bethany. The fragrance filled the room, overpowering the other guests who had been invited to the meal. Mary, seated nearby, purchased the perfume for six hundred denarii and presented it to Jesus, while Judas Iscariot protested, stating “Leave her alone,” expressing disapproval of the lavish expenditure. Jesus responded, “It was intended that she should save this perfume for the day of my burial. You will always have the poor among you, but you will not always have me.” Meanwhile a large crowd of Jews found out that Jesus was there and came, not only because of him but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. So the chief priests made plans to kill Lazarus as well, for on account of him many of the Jews were going over to Jesus and putting their faith in him; a large crowd of Jews found out that Jesus was there and came, not only because of him but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. The next day, a great crowd that had come for the Feast heard that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem, and they took palm branches and went out to meet him, shouting, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Blessed is the King of Israel!” Jesus found a young donkey and sat upon it, as it is written, “Do not be afraid, O Daughter of Zion; see, your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt.” At first his disciples did not understand all this; only after Jesus was glorified did they realize that these things had been written about him and that they had done these things to him. Now the crowd that was with him when he called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to spread the word, and many people, because they had heard that he had given this miraculous sign, went out to meet him; it was a continuation of the events following the resurrection. The Pharisees said to one another, “See, this is getting us nowhere. Look how the whole world has gone after him!” and when questioned about it, they responded, "When did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?" The King will reply, ‘I tell you the truth, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did for me.’ Now there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the Feast, and they came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, with a request: “Sir,” they said, “we would like to see Jesus.” Philip went to tell Andrew; Andrew and Philip in turn told Jesus, who replied, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. I tell you the truth, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds. The man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.” “Whoever serves me must follow me; and where I am, my servant also will be,” the speaker began, stating that his father would honor the one who served him. “Now my heart is troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour?’ No, it was for this very reason I came to this hour. Father, glorify your name!” He continued, emphasizing that wherever he was, his servant would also be present. Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and will glorify it again,” and the crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered; others said an angel had spoken to him. Jesus said, “This voice was for your benefit, not mine.” Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out. The initial disturbance occurred when a large group of individuals, numbering approximately thirty, began to gather in the central plaza. They were dressed in dark clothing and carried various implements, including hammers and shovels. As they approached the building, a single individual stepped forward and began to shout, repeatedly proclaiming that now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out. The group then proceeded to systematically dismantle the structure using their tools, and a significant amount of damage was sustained. “But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself,” he said this to show the kind of death he was going to die. The crowd spoke up, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ will remain forever, so how can you say, ‘The Son of Man must be lifted up’?” Who is this ‘Son of Man’?” Then he will say to those on his left, “Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink.” I was a stranger, and you did not invite me in; I needed clothes, and you did not clothe me. I was sick, and in prison, and you did not look after me. “They also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?’" “He will reply, ‘I tell you the truth, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me,’” Jesus told them, “and then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.” Then Jesus continued, “You are going to have the light just a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, before darkness overtakes you. The man who walks in the dark does not know where he is going.” When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples, “Put your trust in the light while you have it, so that you may become sons of light.” Then, when he had finished speaking, Jesus left and hid himself from them. Even after Jesus had done all these miraculous signs in their presence, they still would not believe in him, this was to fulfill the word of Isaiah the prophet: “Lord, who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” For this reason they could not believe, because, as Isaiah says elsewhere: “He has blinded their eyes and deadened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn—and I would heal them.” Isaiah said this because he saw Jesus’ glory and spoke about him; yet at the same time many even among the leaders believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they would not confess their faith for fear they would be put out of the synagogue. Jesus cried out, “When a man believes in me, he does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me,” for they loved praise from men more than praise from God. --- Account 2: He said, "Truly, I tell you, there is no one who has ever heard such words as these and will understand them; indeed, those who hear must understand. Otherwise, each man will hear the truth and see it in his own mind." --- Account 3: And he added, “If a man believes in me, he does not believe in me alone, but in him who sent me.” When he looks at me, he sees the one who sent him, and he has come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in him should stay in darkness. He states that for the person who hears his words but does not keep them, he did not judge him, because he came to save the world, and there is a judge for the one who rejects him and does not accept his words; that very word which he spoke will condemn him at the last day. He clarifies that he did not speak of his own accord, but the Father who sent him commanded him what to say and how to say it, leading to eternal life, so whatever he says is just what the Father has told him to say. Now the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread were only two days away, and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some sly way to arrest Jesus and kill him; as you know, the Passover is two days away—and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified; Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was approaching, and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some way to get rid of Jesus, for they were afraid of the people. Then Satan entered Judas, called Iscariot, one of the Twelve, and he began to betray Jesus Christ. As a result, Judas went unto the chief priests, with certain amounts of silver, and reported unto them how he should make the betrayal of Jesus to them. The chief priests took this information and consulted with other men, and they went and questioned Jesus, asking him if he was the Messiah. Jesus answered them, stating that he was not, and neither was he another; but it was through the Father that he would come. Then the chief priests, along with their disciples, drew a sword and struck Jesus, wounding him. Afterwards, Satan entered Judas, one of the Twelve. And Judas went to the chief priests and the officers of the temple guard and discussed with them how he might betray Jesus, while at the same time the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas, and they plotted to arrest Jesus in some sly way and kill him. They were delighted and agreed to give him money. But not during the Feast, they said, or the people may riot; it was just before the Passover Feast. Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world and now showed them the full extent of his love. But not during the Feast, they said, or there may be a riot among the people. The evening meal was being served when the devil, having prompted Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, to betray Jesus, and Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from God and was returning to God; so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist. After that, he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples’ feet, drying them with the towel that was wrapped around him. He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?” Jesus replied, “You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand,” and Peter responded, “No,” he said, “you shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered, “Unless I wash you, you have no part with me.” Then, Lord, Simon Peter replied, “not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!” It was immediately followed by the statement that it had begun with his feet. While Jesus was in Bethany in the home of a man known as Simon the Leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, made of pure nard, and while he was reclining at the table, she broke the jar and poured the perfume on his head. Some of those present were saying indignantly to one another, “Why this waste of perfume? It could have been sold for more than a year’s wages and the money given to the poor,” and they rebuked her harshly. Jesus answered, "A person who has had a bath needs only to wash his feet; his whole body is clean. And you are clean, though not every one of you.” For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said not every one was clean. He then said, “Leave her alone,” “Why are you bothering her? She has done a beautiful thing to me. The poor you will always have with you, and you can help them any time you want. But you will not always have me. She did what she could. She poured perfume on my body beforehand to prepare for my burial.” When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and asked, “Why this waste?” and “This perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.” Aware of this, Jesus said to them, "Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful thing to me. The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have me,” while simultaneously he had finished washing their feet, put on his clothes and returned to his place, asking, “Do you understand what I have done for you?” He then stated that they call him ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and rightly so, for that is what he is, and went on to explain that now that he, your Lord and Teacher, has washed your feet, you also should wash one another's feet. He told them, “I have set you an example that you should do as I have done for you,” and insisted, “I tell you the truth, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him. Now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.” The speaker stated that he was not referring to all of them, knowing those he had selected, and explained that what was happening was intended to fulfill the scripture: “He who shares my bread has lifted up his heel against me.” Before it happens, I am telling you now so that when it does happen you will believe that I am He; whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me, and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me. When she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial, and wherever the gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her. Then one of the Twelve—the one called Judas Iscariot—went to the chief priests and asked, “What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?” and they counted out for him thirty silver coins; from then on Judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over. Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus to them, and they were delighted to hear this and promised him money, so he watched for an opportunity to hand him over. He consented, and watched for an opportunity to hand Jesus over to them when no crowd was present. Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed, and Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and make preparations for us to eat the Passover,” while he was troubled in spirit and testified, "I tell you the truth, one of you is going to betray me.” His disciples stared at one another, at a loss to know which of them he meant, and one of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him. Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, “Ask him which one he means,” while leaning back against Jesus, and the disciple asked him, “Lord, who is it?” At the same time, they asked, “Where do you want us to prepare for it?” He replied, “As you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him to the house that he enters.” On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Where do you want us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?” He replied, "Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, 'The Teacher says: My appointed time is near. I am going to celebrate the Passover with my disciples at your house.'" So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover. When it was customary to sacrifice the Passover lamb, Jesus’ disciples asked him, “Where do you want us to go and make preparations for you to eat the Passover?” He sent two of his disciples, telling them, "Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him. Say to the owner of the house he enters, ‘The Teacher asks: Where is my guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’ He will show you a large upper room, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us there.” When the hour came, Jesus and his apostles reclined at the table, and he said to them, “I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds fulfillment in the kingdom of God.” While they were eating, Jesus was reclining at the table with the Twelve, and he said, "I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me." They were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, “Surely not I, Lord?” Jesus replied, “The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me,” and then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, son of Simon. “The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him,” Jesus continued, “But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.” Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, “Surely not I, Rabbi?” Jesus answered, “Yes, it is you,” and as soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him. While evening came, Jesus arrived with the Twelve and they were reclining at the table eating when he said, “I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me—one who is eating with me.” They were saddened, and one by one they said to him, "Surely not I?" “It is one of the Twelve,” he replied, “one who dips bread into the bowl with me. While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, ‘Take and eat; this is my body.’ After taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. For I tell you I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me.” Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you. This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins,” and they all drank from it. In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you. But the hand of him who is going to betray me is with mine on the table.” “They began to question among themselves which of them it might be who would do this,” Jesus stated, “and also a dispute arose among them as to which of them was considered to be greatest.” He then told them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them; and those who exercise authority over them call themselves Benefactors. But you are not to be like that. Instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the one who serves. For who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who is at the table?” “What you are about to do, do quickly,” Jesus told him, but no one at the meal understood why Jesus said this to him. Since Judas had charge of the money, some thought Jesus was telling him to buy what was needed for the Feast, or to give something to the poor, and I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred one on me, so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father’s kingdom,” I said, and “I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.” When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. Then Jesus told them, “This very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: “‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’” “You will all fall away,” Jesus told them, “for it is written: “‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’” And as he spoke, Simon was addressed directly, “Simon, Simon, Satan has asked to sift you as wheat.” But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee. As soon as Judas had taken the bread, he went out. It was night. Peter declared, “Even if all fall away, I will not,” and then replied, “Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will.” Simon responded with a prayer for Peter’s faith, stating, “But I have prayed for you, Simon, that your faith may not fail. And when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers,” while Peter himself countered with, “Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death.” Following this exchange, Jesus said, "Now is the Son of Man glorified and God is glorified in him." “My children, I will be with you only a little longer,” the speaker began, “You will look for me, and just as I told the Jews, so I tell you now: Where I am going, you cannot come.” A new command was given: “Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another.” If God is glorified in him, God will glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him at once. “By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another,” he said, and then he began to show them how to share their possessions with those in need, distributing a large quantity of food and drink among them, and instructing them to continue doing this. He also instructed them to sell their possessions and give to the poor, and to sit at his feet while he spoke to them. “I tell you the truth,” Jesus answered, and stated that tonight, before the rooster crows twice, he would be disowned by Peter three times. He emphasized this would occur today, and repeated his prediction “before the rooster crows.” Then Jesus asked them, “Where are you going, Simon Peter, where you cannot follow now, but you will follow later,” and Peter asked, “Lord, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.” But Peter declared, “Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you,” and all the other disciples said the same. And then Jesus asked them, "When I sent you without purse, bag or sandals, did you lack anything? Nothing," they answered. He said to them, “But now if you have a purse, take it, and also a bag; and if you don’t have a sword, sell your cloak and buy one. It is written: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors’; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment.” The disciples said, “See, Lord, here are two swords. That is enough,” he replied. They went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray,” and then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.” He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled. On reaching the place, he said to them, “Pray that you will not fall into temptation,” and Jesus withdrew about a stone’s throw beyond them, knelt down and prayed, “Father, if you are willing, take this cup from me; yet not my will, but yours be done.” An angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him, and being in anguish, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood falling to the ground. He took Peter, James and John along with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled, saying “My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death,” and instructing them to stay here and keep watch. Going a little farther, he fell to the ground and prayed that if possible the hour might pass from him, “Abba, Father, everything is possible for you. Take this cup from me. Yet not what I will, but what you will.” Then Jesus answered, "Will you really lay down your life for me? I tell you the truth, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times! Do not let your hearts be troubled. Trust in God; trust also in me. In my Father’s house are many rooms; if it were not so, I would have told you. I am going there to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me that you also may be where I am.” Then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping, and addressing Peter he said, “Simon, are you asleep? Could you not keep watch for one hour? Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the body is weak.” He asked Peter and the other men, “Could you men not keep watch with me for one hour?” and went away a second time to pray, “My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I drink it, may your will be done.” When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy, and once more he went away and prayed the same thing. Then, when he rose from prayer and went back to the disciples, he found them asleep, exhausted from sorrow, and asked them, “Why are you sleeping?” Get up and pray so that you will not fall into temptation, he said. When he returned, he found them sleeping because their eyes were heavy, and they did not know what to say to him. Returning the third time, he said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Enough! The hour has come. Look, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise! Let us go! Here comes my betrayer!” Then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour is near, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us go! Here comes my betrayer!” Thomas said to him, "Lord, we don't know where you are going, so how can we know the way?" Jesus answered, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you really knew me, you would know my Father as well. From now on, you do know him and have seen him.” As he was speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, appeared, and with him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people. Philip said, “Lord, show us the Father and that will be enough for us.” Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "The one I kiss is the man; arrest him and lead him away under guard." Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed him, while a crowd came up and the man who was called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them. Jesus replied, "Friend, do what you came for,” and simultaneously the men seized Jesus and arrested him, and Jesus asked him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” When Jesus was being seized by men, one of those standing near drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear. “Am I leading a rebellion,” said Jesus, “that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me?” or “Put your sword back in its place,” Jesus said to him, “for all who draw the sword will die by the sword” or “No more of this!” And as some of Jesus’ followers saw what was going to happen, they asked, "Lord, should we strike with our swords?" But one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. Then Jesus answered, either “Am I leading a rebellion,” that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me?” or “Put your sword back in its place,” for all who draw the sword will die by the sword or “No more of this!” And he touched the man’s ear and healed him. Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once put at my disposal more than twelve legions of angels? The man then asked if it was possible to summon a great host, exceeding twelve legions of angels, and his father responded that he would immediately make available such a force to him. He then inquired whether it was conceivable that he could appeal to his parent for assistance, and his father affirmed that he would instantly deploy more than twelve legions of angels at the man’s disposal. At that time Jesus said to the crowd, “Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me?” Every day I sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled. Then Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders, who had come for him, “Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come with swords and clubs?” Every day I was with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me. Then everyone deserted him and fled. But this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled, and all the disciples deserted him and fled. A young man, wearing nothing but a linen garment, was following Jesus when he was seized. Upon being apprehended, he fled naked, abandoning his garment in his haste. Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas, the high priest, and all the chief priests, elders, and teachers of the law came together there; Peter followed him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest where he sat with the guards and warmed himself at the fire, while simultaneously, those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled. But Peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. He entered and sat down with the guards to see the outcome. The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death, and though many false witnesses came forward, they did not find any, although their statements did not agree. Every day I was with you in the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on me; finally two came forward and declared, “This fellow said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days,’” but then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him: “We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this man-made temple and in three days will build another, not made by man.’” This is your hour—when darkness reigns. Yet even then their testimony did not agree; it was observed that a large crowd had gathered around the central structure, and several individuals were actively engaged in attempting to move forward towards it, while others remained stationary at a distance. Account 2: The initial reports indicated that a significant number of people were present, and that some were moving toward the building, whilst others stood back. Account 3: It was noted that a considerable group had assembled around the main building, with individuals proceeding towards it and others remaining at a distance. Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, “Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?” But Jesus remained silent and gave no answer. The high priest said to him, "I charge you under oath by the living God: Tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.” Jesus answered, “Yes, it is as you say,” and he added, “But I say to all of you: In the future you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven.” Jesus then responded to Philip, stating: "Don't you know me, Philip, even after I have been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, 'Show us the Father'? Don’t you believe that I am in the Father, and that the Father is in me? The words I say to you are not just my own. Rather, it is the Father, living in me, who is doing his work.” The high priest reacted by tearing his clothes and asking, “Why do we need any more witnesses? You have heard the blasphemy. What do you I can only relate what I witnessed, and I urge you to believe me when I say that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; or at least believe on the evidence of the miracles themselves. A large crowd had gathered near the well, drawn by reports of a man who could heal the sick. As people approached, he began to speak, and then, as he spoke, individuals were brought forward – a paralytic whom his companions had carried from Jesuse, a man suffering from dropsy, another with internal bleeding, and still others afflicted with various ailments. The man proceeded to lay his hands on each of them and pray, and immediately, each person was restored to health; the paralytic could walk, the man with dropsy ceased to swell, the one with bleeding stopped, and all the others experienced relief from their respective conditions. I tell you the truth, anyone who has faith in me will do what I have been doing, and he will do even greater things than these, because I am going to the Father. You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it, “If you love me, you will obey what I command,” and I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Counselor to be with you forever—the Spirit of truth. The world cannot accept him, because it neither sees him nor knows him, but you know him, for he lives with you and will be in you. And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring glory to the Father. I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you. Before long, the world will not see me anymore, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live. The initial event occurred with a sudden and unexpected appearance, followed by an immediate statement that it would soon cease to be visible to the wider world, yet would remain perceptible to those present. On that day it was realized that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you. Whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too will love him and show myself to him. Then Judas said, “But, Lord, why do you intend to show yourselves to us and not to the world?” Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, “He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Look, now you have heard the blasphemy,” while Jesus replied, "If anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him. He who does not love me will not obey my teaching. These words you hear are not my own; they belong to the Father who sent me. ‘All this I have spoken while still with you,’ Jesus continued, ‘but the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid. ‘You heard me say, ‘I am going away and I am coming back to you,’ if you loved me, you would be glad that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.” I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe. I will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world is coming. He has no hold on me, but the world must learn that I love the Father and that I do exactly what my Father has commanded me. “Come now; let us leave,” I said, identifying myself as the true vine and my Father as the gardener, explaining that he cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful. You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you. “Remain in me, and I will remain in you,” he said, “No branch can bear fruit by itself; it must remain in the vine. Neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in me. ‘I am the vine; you are the branches,’ he continued, ‘If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing. If anyone does not remain in me, he is like a branch that is thrown away and withers; such branches are picked up, thrown into the fire and burned.’ What do you think?,” they answered. “As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you,” Jesus stated, “that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples. You must remain in my love.” If you obey my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have obeyed my Father’s commands and remain in his love; I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete. My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you, greater love has no one than this, that he lay down his life for his friends, and you are my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business; instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you. You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit—fruit that will last. This is my command: Love each other. If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first. If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. As it is, you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world. That is why the world hates you. Remember the words I spoke to you: ‘No servant is greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they obeyed my teaching, they will obey yours also. They will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the One who sent me. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin; he who hates me hates my Father as well. --- Account 2: The man said that if he hadn’t spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin. He who hates him hates his Father as well. Then seizing him, they led him away and took him into the house of the high priest, and Peter followed at a distance. If I had not done among them what no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin; but now they have seen these miracles, and yet they have hated both me and my Father. They hated me without reason. Then they spit in his face and struck him with their fists, others slapped him, and some began to spit at him; they blindfolded him, struck him with their fists, and said, “Prophesy!” And the guards took him and beat him. They all condemned him as worthy of death. “Prophesy to us, Christ,” one person said, “Who hit you?” Simultaneously, another declared, “When the Counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father, he will testify about me. And you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning. All this I have told you so that you will not go astray.” They will put you out of the synagogue; in fact, a time is coming when anyone who kills you will think he is offering a service to God. It was stated that they have not known the Father or me, and that this would lead them to do such things. I have told you this, so that when the time comes you will remember that I warned you. Now I am going to him who sent me, yet none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?' Because I have said these things, you are filled with grief. But I tell you the truth: It is for your good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Counselor will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you. When he comes, he will convict the world of guilt in regard to sin and righteousness and judgment: in regard to sin, because men do not believe in him; in regard to righteousness, because he is going to the Father, where you can no longer see him; and in regard to judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned. He has much more to say to you, more than you can now bear. When he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth, not speaking on his own but only what he hears and will tell you what is yet to come; he will bring glory to him by taking from what is his and making it known to you, for all that belongs to the Father is his. Now Peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him while he was there, saying “You also were with Jesus of Galilee,” but he denied it before them all, stating “I don’t know what you’re talking about.” In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me. While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came by. When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and had sat down together, Peter sat down with them. A servant girl saw him seated there in the firelight. She looked closely at him and said, “This man was with him,” but he denied it, saying “Woman, I don’t know him.” Then he went out to the gateway, where another girl saw him and said to the people there, “This fellow was with Jesus of Nazareth,” and he denied it again, with an oath: “I don’t know the man!” When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked closely at him. “You also were with that Nazarene, Jesus,” she said. But he denied it. “I don’t know or understand what you’re talking about,” he said, and went out into the entryway. A little later someone else saw him and said, "You also are one of them. Man, I am not!” Peter replied. Some of his disciples kept asking, “What does he mean by saying, ‘In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me,’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?” They kept asking, “What does he mean by ‘a little while’? We don’t understand what he is saying.” Jesus saw that they wanted to ask him about it, so he said to them, “Are you asking one another what I meant when I said, ‘In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me’?” He told them the truth, stating that they would weep and mourn while the world rejoiced, and that their grief would turn to joy. A woman was in pain as her time came, experiencing anguish due to childbirth; however, when her baby was born, she forgot the previous suffering because of the overwhelming joy that a child was brought into the world. Now is your time of grief, and I will see you again, and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy. In that day you will no longer ask me anything; I tell you the truth, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name. Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete. Though I have been speaking figuratively, a time is coming when I will no longer use this kind of language but will tell you plainly about my Father; and it was then that he appeared to me in a dream, standing before me and speaking to me, and he spoke with great authority, demanding that I should immediately go and proclaim the message to all the nations, saying that the time was near and that they must repent; and as I awoke, I felt a profound sense of urgency and knew that this revelation demanded immediate action. In that day, he said you will ask in his name, stating that he was not saying he would ask the Father on your behalf, nor that the Father himself loves you because you have loved him and believed that he came from God. He explained that he came from the Father and entered the world; now he is leaving the world and going back to the Father. Then Jesus’ disciples said, “Now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech. Now we can see that you know all things and that you do not even need to have anyone ask you questions. This makes us believe that you came from God,” and Jesus answered, “You believe at last!” But a time is coming, and has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and you will leave me all alone; yet I am not alone, for my Father is with me. “I have told you these things,” he said, “so that in me you may have peace. In this world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world.” After Jesus said this, he looked toward heaven and prayed, “Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may glorify you. For you granted him authority over all people that he might give eternal life to all those you have given him. Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent. I have brought you glory on earth by completing the work you gave me to do. And now, Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world began.” He then revealed those who were given to him out of the world to you, stating they were yours and that they had obeyed your word. Now they know that everything you have given me comes from you; I gave them the words you gave me and they accepted them, knowing with certainty that I came from you and believed you sent me. I pray for them, not for the world but for those you have given me, for they are yours, and all I have is yours, and all you have is mine, and glory has come to me through them. I will remain in the world no longer, but they are still in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them by the power of your name—the name you gave me—so that they may be one as we are one; while I was with them, I protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me, and none has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that Scripture would be fulfilled. I am coming to you now, but I say these things while I am still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them. I have given them your word and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than I am of the world. My prayer is not that you take them out of the world but that you protect them from the evil one. They are not of the world, even as I am not of it. Sanctify them by the truth; your word is truth. As you sent me into the world, I have sent them into the world. For them I sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified, and “My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me. I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one: I in them and you in me. May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me. Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, and to see my glory, the glory you have given me because you loved me before the creation of the world.” Righteous Father, though the world does not know you, I know you, and they know that you have sent me. I have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that I myself may be in them. When he had finished praying, Jesus left with his disciples and crossed the Kidron Valley. On the other side there was an olive grove, and he and his disciples went into it. Now Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. So Judas came to the grove, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some officials from the chief priests and Pharisees, who were carrying torches, lanterns and weapons. Jesus, knowing all that was going to happen to him, went out and asked them, “Who is it you want?” “Jesus of Nazareth,” they replied. When the servant girl saw him there, she said again to those standing around, “This fellow is one of them,” and after a little while, those standing there went up to Peter and said, “Surely you are one of them, for your accent gives you away.” Then Jesus said, “I am he,” and Judas the traitor was standing there with them. When Jesus said, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground. Again he asked them, “Who is it you want?” And they said, “Jesus of Nazareth.” About an hour later, another asserted, “Certainly this fellow was with him, for he is a Galilean,” and Peter replied, “Man, I don’t know what you’re talking about!” Just as he was speaking, the rooster crowed. Jesus answered, "I told you that I am he," and “If you are looking for me, then let these men go.” This happened so that the words he had spoken would be fulfilled: “I have not lost one of those you gave me.” Then he began to call down curses on himself and he swore to them, “I don’t know the man!” Again he denied it. After a little while, those standing near said to Peter, "Surely you are one of them, for you are a Galilean." He began to call down curses on himself, and he swore to them, “I don’t know this man you're talking about.” Immediately a rooster crowed, the second time, and Peter remembered the Lord’s words: “Before the rooster crows twice you will disown me three times.” Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear (the servant’s name was Malchus), and the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter. And he went outside and wept bitterly, remembering the word Jesus had spoken: “Before the rooster crows today, you will disown me three times.” Then the detachment of soldiers with its commander and the Jewish officials arrested Jesus, and they bound him and brought him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year. Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jews that it would be good if one man died for the people. The men who were guarding Jesus began mocking and beating him, demanding he prophesy while blindfolded and saying many insulting things to him. Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard, but Peter had to wait outside at the door, where a girl on duty asked him if he was one of Jesus’ disciples, to which he replied that he wasn't; meanwhile, the other disciple went back, spoke to the girl and brought Peter in. It was cold, and servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm, with Peter also standing with them, warming himself. At daybreak the council of the elders of the people, both the chief priests and teachers of the law, met together, and Jesus was led before them; early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people came to the decision to put Jesus to death, and they bound him, led him away and handed him over to Pilate, the governor. The chief priests, with the elders, the teachers of the law and the whole Sanhedrin, reached a decision, they bound Jesus, led him away and handed him over to Pilate. “If you are the Christ,” they said, “tell us,” and Jesus answered, "If I tell you, you will not believe me, and if I asked you, you would not answer," while Pilate asked him, “Aren’t you going to answer? See how many things they are accusing you of.” But Jesus still made no reply, and Pilate was amazed. When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he was seized with remorse and returned the thirty silver coins to the chief priests and the elders. “I have sinned,” he said, “for I have betrayed innocent blood.” They replied, "That's your responsibility." So Judas threw the money into the temple and left, then he went away and hanged himself. They all asked, “Are you then the Son of God?” He replied, “You are right in saying I am.” Then they said, "You are right in saying I am." The chief priests picked up the coins and said, “It is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money,” and so they decided to use the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners. Following his response, they continued, "We have heard it from his own lips.” That is why it has been called the Field of Blood to this day, as a large group of individuals were observed engaging in a violent confrontation that involved numerous projectiles being launched into the air, followed by a sustained period of intense shouting and physical struggle amongst those present. It was during this tumultuous exchange that a significant quantity of blood was spilled upon the ground, leading to the enduring name of the location. Then the whole assembly rose and led him off to Pilate, and they began to accuse him, saying, “We have found this man subverting our nation. He opposes payment of taxes to Caesar and claims to be Christ, a king,” while simultaneously what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “They took the thirty silver coins, the price set on him by the people of Israel, and they used them to buy the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me.” Pilate then asked Jesus, "Are you the king of the Jews?Yes, it is as you say,” Jesus replied. Meanwhile, Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” Yes, it is as you say,” Jesus replied. Then Pilate announced to the chief priests and the crowd, “I find no basis for a charge against this man.” But they insisted, “He stirs up the people all over Judea by his teaching. He started in Galilee and has come all the way here,” on hearing which Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean. Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching, “I have spoken openly to the world,” Jesus replied, “I always taught in synagogues or at the temple, where all the Jews come together. I said nothing in secret. Why question me? Ask those who heard me. Surely they know what I said.” When Jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. “Is this the way you answer the high priest?” he demanded. “If I said something wrong,” Jesus replied, “testify as to what is wrong. But if I spoke the truth, why did you strike me?” The official’s action was immediately followed by a response from Jesus, who questioned the circumstances of the confrontation and requested an explanation for the assault. When Annas learned that Jesus was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem at that time, and then, still bound, he sent him to Caiaphas the high priest. As Simon Peter stood warming himself, he was asked, “You are not one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it, saying, “I am not,” and one of the high priest’s servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, challenged him, “Didn't I see you with him in the olive grove?” Again Peter denied it, and at that moment a rooster began to crow. Then the Jews led Jesus from Caiaphas to the palace of the Roman governor, and by now it was early morning; to avoid ceremonial uncleanness, the Jews did not enter the palace and wanted to be able to eat the Passover. Pilate came out to them and asked, “What charges are you bringing against this man?” “If he were not a criminal,” they replied, “we would not have handed him over to you.” Pilate said, "Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law." “But we have no right to execute anyone,” the Jews objected. This happened so that the words Jesus had spoken indicating the kind of death he was going to die would be fulfilled. Pilate then went back inside the palace and summoned Jesus, asking him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” “Is that your own idea,” Jesus asked, “or did others talk to you about me?” “Am I a Jew?” Pilate replied. “It was your people and your chief priests who handed you over to me. What is it you have done?” Jesus said, "My kingdom is not of this world. If it were, my servants would fight to prevent my arrest by the Jews. But now my kingdom is from another place.” When Herod saw Jesus, he was greatly pleased, because for a long time he had been wanting to see him, and from what he had heard about him, he hoped to see him perform some miracle, but Jesus gave him no answer. When he was accused by the chief priests and the teachers of the law, vehemently standing there and mocking him, Herod and his soldiers ridiculed and mocked him, dressing him in an elegant robe, and they sent him back to Pilate. Then, when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer. That day Herod and Pilate became friends—before this they had been enemies. It was reported that Herod and Pilate became friends, a development following a period of animosity between the two men. Then Pilate asked him, “Don’t you hear the testimony they are bringing against you?” but Jesus made no reply, not even to a single charge, to the great amazement of the governor. Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers and the people, and said to them, "You brought me this man as one who was inciting the people to rebellion. I have examined him in your presence and have found no basis for your charges against him.” “You are a king, then!” said Pilate, and Jesus answered, “You are right in saying I am a king. In fact, for this reason I was born, and for this I came into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone on the side of truth listens to me,” and with this he went out again to the Jews and said, "I find no basis for a charge against him.” Neither had been executed, for Herod had sent him back; as was evident, he had not done anything to deserve death. Therefore, he was punished, and then released, a practice dictated by custom wherein I would typically release one prisoner at the time of the Passover; and it was in this context that I asked, “Do you want me to release ‘the king of the Jews’?” Now it was the custom at the Feast to release a prisoner whom the people requested, and it was the governor’s custom at the Feast to release a prisoner chosen by the crowd; a man called Barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising, and at that time they had a notorious prisoner, called Barabbas. With one voice they cried out, “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us!” and so when the crowd had gathered, Pilate asked them, "Which one do you want me to release to you: Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?" For he knew it was out of envy that they had handed Jesus over to him. While Pilate was sitting on the judge’s seat, his wife sent him this message: “Don’t have anything to do with that innocent man, for I have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.” But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus executed. The crowd came up and asked Pilate to do for them what he usually did. “Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?” asked Pilate, knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed Jesus over to him. But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have Pilate release Barabbas instead. “What shall I do, then, with the one you call the king of the Jews?” Pilate asked them, and they all answered, “Crucify him!” “Why? What crime has he committed?” asked Pilate. But they shouted all the louder, “Crucify him!” Wanting to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas to them, and it was then that they shouted back, “No, not him! Give us Barabbas!” He had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified. For the third time he spoke to them: “Why? What crime has this man committed? I have found in him no grounds for the death penalty. Therefore I will have him punished and then release him,” but with loud shouts they insistently demanded that he be crucified, and their shouts prevailed. So Pilate decided to grant their demand; he released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, the one they asked for, and surrendered Jesus to their will. When Pilate saw that he was getting nowhere, but that instead an uproar was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd, “I am innocent of this man’s blood,” he said, “It is your responsibility!” All the people answered, "Let his blood be on us and on our children!" The soldiers led Jesus away into the palace, that is, the Praetorium, and called together the whole company of soldiers; then he released Barabbas to them, but they had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified. The governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him, then they stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him, and after that Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged. They twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and simultaneously, they began to call out to him, “Hail, king of the Jews!” Again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him, while falling on their knees, they paid homage to him. Once more Pilate came out and said to the Jews, “Look, I am bringing him out to you to let you know that I find no basis for a charge against him.” When Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, Pilate said to them, "Here is the man!” It was then that Pilate repeated his earlier statement, asserting once again that he found no basis for a charge against him. As soon as the chief priests and their officials saw him, they shouted, “Crucify! Crucify!” But Pilate answered, “You take him and crucify him. As for me, I find no basis for a charge against him.” The Jews insisted, “We have a law, and according to that law he must die, because he claimed to be the Son of God,” and simultaneously, the chief priests and their officials continued to demand his crucifixion. When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid and went back inside the palace. “Where do you come from?” he asked Jesus, but Jesus gave him no answer. “Do you refuse to speak to me?” Pilate said. “Don’t you realize I have power either to free you or to crucify you?” Jesus answered, “You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of a greater sin.” From then on, Pilate tried to set Jesus free, but the Jews kept shouting, “If you let this man go, you are no friend of Caesar. Anyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar.” When Pilate heard this, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judge’s seat at a place known as the Stone Pavement, which in Aramaic was Gabbatha; and there were many who stood around, some of them Roman soldiers, and others local people. Account 2: It was then that Pilate ordered the custody staff to bring Jesus forward, and he himself sat down on the raised platform at the Stone Pavement (Gabbatha), a location where judgements were frequently held. Account 3: Immediately after hearing the accusations, Pilate directed the guards to escort Jesus to the Stone Pavement (Gabbatha), where he then took his place upon the elevated area used for judicial proceedings. It was the day of Preparation of Passover Week, about the sixth hour, and Pilate said to the Jews, “Here is your king,” but they shouted, “Take him away! Take him away! Crucify him! Shall I crucify your king?” Pilate asked, and the chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.” And then, after mocking him by saying “Hail, king of the Jews!” and spitting on him, they twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on his head, putting a staff in his right hand and kneeling in front of him while repeatedly striking him on the head again and again. When they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe and put his own clothes on him, and finally Pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. A certain man from Cyrene, Simon, the father of Alexander and Rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country when he was forced to carry the cross, as they mocked him and took off his robe before leading him away to Golgotha (The Place of the Skull) to be crucified. As they were going out, they met Simon and forced him to carry the cross behind Jesus, and a large number of people followed them, including women who mourned and wailed for him; Jesus turned and said to them, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me; weep for yourselves and for your children.” For the time will come when you will say, ‘Blessed are the barren women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!’ Then “‘they will say to the mountains, “Fall on us!” and to the hills, “Cover us!”’ They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which means The Place of the Skull), and for if men do these things when the tree is green what will happen when it is dry? Two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed; so the soldiers took charge of Jesus, carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the Skull (which in Aramaic is called Golgotha). Here they crucified him, and with him two others—one on each side and Jesus in the middle. Then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it, and after tasting it, he refused to drink it. They crucified him, and Pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross which read: |sc JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS. Many of the Jews read this sign, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the sign was written in Aramaic, Latin and Greek. The chief priests of the Jews protested to Pilate, “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that this man claimed to be king of the Jews.” Pilate answered, "What I have written, I have written,” and dividing up his clothes, they cast lots to see what each would get. When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they divided up his clothes by casting lots, taking four shares including a seamless garment woven in one piece from top to bottom, and leaving an undergarment behind. Two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left, and sitting down, the soldiers kept watch over him there. Above his head they placed the written charge against him: “THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS,” while those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, "So! You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, come down from the cross and save yourself!” It was the third hour when they crucified him. In the same way, the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among themselves, saying, “He saved others, but he can’t save himself! And saying, ‘You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! Come down from the cross, if you are the Son of God!’” “He saved others,” they said, “but he can’t save himself! He’s the King of Israel! Let this Christ, this King of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe.” The chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders heaped insults on him in the same way, while the robbers who were crucified with him also heaped insults on him, stating “He trusts in God. Let God rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’” From the sixth hour until the ninth hour, darkness came over all the land; at the sixth hour darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour. At the ninth hour, Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?”—which means, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” Some of those standing there heard this and said, "He's calling Elijah,” while others simply observed that he was crucified at the place called the Skull, along with the criminals – one on his right, the other on his left. Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing,” and as he spoke, they divided up his clothes by casting lots. The people stood watching, and the rulers even sneered at him, saying, "He saved others; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.” The soldiers also came up and mocked him, offering him wine vinegar and saying, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself,” while one of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him: “Aren’t you the Christ? Save yourself and us!” Immediately one of them ran and got a sponge. He filled it with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to Jesus to drink. The rest said, "Now leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to save him,” and when some of those standing near heard this, they said, “Listen, he’s calling Elijah.” One man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to Jesus to drink. “Now leave him alone. Let’s see if Elijah comes to take him down,” he said. With a loud cry, Jesus breathed his last. There But the other criminal rebuked him, “Don’t you fear God,” he said, “since you are under the same sentence? We are punished justly, for we are getting what our deeds deserve. But this man has done nothing wrong.” Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom,” and Jesus answered him, “I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise.” And when Jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit. It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour, for the sun stopped shining. At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook and the rocks split, and the tombs broke open and the bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life. When the centurion stood there in front of Jesus, hearing his cry and seeing how he died, he said, “Surely this man was the Son of God!” At the same time, Jesus called out with a loud voice, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit,” and when he had said this, he breathed his last. The centurion, seeing what had happened, praised God and said, “Surely this was a righteous man.” Near the cross of Jesus stood his mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene, while some women were watching from a distance; among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome. When all the people who had gathered to witness this sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and went away. But all those who knew him, including the women who had followed him from Galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things. When Jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, “Dear woman, here is your son,” and to the disciple, “Here is your mother.” From that time on, this disciple took her into his home. Later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the Scripture would be fulfilled, Jesus said, “I am thirsty,” and a jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to his lips. After Jesus had received the drink, he said, “It is finished,” and with that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. They came out of the tombs, and after Jesus’ resurrection they went into the holy city and appeared to many people. When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, “Surely he was the Son of God!” Many women were there, watching from a distance; these women had followed Jesus from Galilee to care for his needs, and many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem were also present. Now there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, a good and upright man, who had not consented to their decision and action, and he came from the Judean town of Arimathea; it was Preparation Day (that is, the day before the Sabbath) as evening approached, and Joseph of Arimathea, a prominent member of the Council, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked for Jesus’ body. He was surprised to hear that he was already dead, and summoning the centurion, he asked him if Jesus had already died. Joseph, a good and upright man, had not consented to their decision and action. Going to Pilate, he asked for Jesus’ body, and when he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to Joseph, among whom were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons. Then he took down the body, wrapped it in linen cloth, and placed it in a tomb cut out of rock, one in which no one had yet been laid. As evening approached, a rich man named Joseph, who had become a disciple of Jesus, went to Pilate, asked for Jesus’ body, and Pilate ordered that it be given to him. Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. He rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away. On Preparation Day, as the Sabbath was about to begin, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there opposite the tomb where he was laid, and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid with them; the women who had come with Jesus from Galilee followed Joseph and saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it. The next day, following Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees went to Pilate, stating that they remembered while he was still alive that deceiver had said, “After three days I will rise again.” When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus’ body. Then they went home and prepared spices and perfumes. But they rested on the Sabbath in obedience to the commandment, and because it was the day of Preparation, and the next day was to be a special Sabbath, the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies taken down so that the bodies would not remain left on the crosses during the Sabbath. So give the order for the tomb to be made secure until the third day; otherwise, his disciples may come and steal the body and tell the people that he has been raised from the dead, this last deception will be worse than the first. “Take a guard,” Pilate answered, “Go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.” So they went and made the tomb secure by putting a seal on the stone and posting the guard. After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb, having asked each other who would roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb. Upon arrival, they found the stone rolled away, for a violent earthquake had occurred, during which an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it. His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow; the guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men. The angel said to the women, "Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. He is not here; he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay.” But when they entered the room, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. While they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood beside them. In their fright the women bowed down with their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, “Why do you look for the living among the dead? He is not here; he has risen! Remember how he told you, while he was still with you in Galilee: The Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, be crucified and on the third day be raised again, and the soldiers therefore came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with Jesus, and then those of the other. When they arrived at the site where Jesus was, they found him already dead, and instead of breaking his legs, one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, bringing forth a sudden flow of blood and water. The man who witnessed this event provided testimony, stating that he knew he was telling the truth and offering it so that others might believe. These events occurred in accordance with scripture, specifically referencing the prophecy “Not one of his bones will be broken,” and another passage which stated “They will look on the one they have pierced.” Then they remembered his words, and later Joseph of Arimathea asked Pilate for the body of Jesus. Now Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly because he feared the Jews, and with Pilate’s permission, he came and took the body away, accompanied by Nicodemus, the man who earlier had visited Jesus at night, who brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds. Taking Jesus’ body, the two of them wrapped it, with the spices, in strips of linen, this was in accordance with Jewish burial customs, at the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid. Then, going quickly, they told his disciples: ‘He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.’ So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. Suddenly Jesus met them, “Greetings,” he said. They came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him. But when they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large, had been rolled away. As they entered the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side, and they were alarmed. “Don’t be alarmed,” he said. “You are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified. He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him. Because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there. When they returned from the tomb, they immediately told all these things to the Eleven and to others, and then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me.” But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him, just as he told you,’” and trembling and bewildered, the women fled from the tomb, saying nothing to anyone because they were afraid. When Jesus rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons. She went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping, while it was still dark on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance. So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one Jesus loved, and said, "They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have put him!" So Peter and the other disciple started for the tomb. Both were running, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first. He bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there but did not go in. It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the others with them who told this to the apostles, but they did not believe the women, because their words seemed to them like nonsense, and when they heard that Jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it. Peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb, bending over to see the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he went away, wondering to himself what had happened; then Simon Peter, who was behind him, arrived and went into the tomb where he saw the strips of linen lying there, as well as the burial cloth that had been around Jesus’ head. The cloth was folded up by itself, separate from the linen. Finally the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went inside and saw and believed; at the same time as this, the first disciple arrived and also saw and believed. (They still did not understand from Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.) Now that same day two of them were going to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem, and they were talking with each other about everything that had happened. As they talked and discussed these things with each other, Jesus himself came up and walked along with them; but they were kept from recognizing him. He asked them, “What are you discussing together as you walk along?” They stood still, their faces downcast, and one of them, named Cleopas, asked him, “Are you only a visitor to Jerusalem and do not know the things that have happened there in these days?” “What things?” he asked. “About Jesus of Nazareth,” they replied. He was a prophet, powerful in word and deed before God and all the people, and the chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him. But we had hoped that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel, and what is more, it is the third day since all this took place. In addition, some of our women amazed us; they went to the tomb early this morning but didn’t find his body. They came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels, who said he was alive. Then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but him they did not see. He said to them, “How foolish you are, and how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!” As Jesus did not have to suffer these things and then enter his glory, he began with Moses and all the Prophets, explaining to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself. As they approached the village to which they were going, Jesus acted as if he were going farther. But they urged him strongly, “Stay with us, for it is nearly evening; the day is almost over,” so he went in to stay with them. When he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and began to give it to them. Then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, and he disappeared from their sight. They asked each other, “Were not our hearts burning within us while he talked with us on the road and opened the Scriptures to us?” They got up and returned at once to Jerusalem, where they found the Eleven and those with them, assembled together; meanwhile, the disciples went back to their homes, but Mary stood outside the tomb crying, bending over to look into the tomb as she wept. When they arrived, some were saying, “It is true! The Lord has risen and has appeared to Simon,” while others reported seeing two angels in white, one seated at the head and the other at the foot where Jesus’ body had been. After recounting their journey and the moment Jesus broke bread, two individuals began to speak about what had happened. She asked, “Woman, why are you crying?” and replied, “They have taken my Lord away, and I don't know where they have put him.” At this, he said, "Woman, why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for?" Thinking he was the gardener, she said, "Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will get him." Jesus said to her, “Mary,” and she turned toward him and cried out in Aramaic, “Rabboni!” (which means Teacher). He then said, “Do not hold on to me, for I have not yet returned to the Father. Go instead to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am returning to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” Simultaneously, Jesus stood among them and said, "Peace be with you.” They were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost. He said to them, “Why are you troubled, and why do doubts rise in your minds? Look at my hands and my feet. It is I myself! Touch me and see; a When he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet. On the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!” And while they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement, he asked them, "Do you have anything here to eat?" They gave him a piece of broiled fish, and he took it and ate it in their presence. He said to them, “This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.” After the event occurred, Jesus appeared in a different form to two of the women while they were walking in the country. These returned and reported it to the rest, but they did not believe them either. Meanwhile, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened, and then he opened their minds so they could understand the Scriptures. After he said this, he showed them his hands and side, and the disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord. Again Jesus said, “Peace be with you! As the Father has sent me, I am sending you,” and with that he breathed on them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven; if you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven.” Later Jesus appeared to the Eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen. He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the good news to all creation. Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned. And these signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues,” and he told them, "This is what is written: The Christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day, and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. You are witnesses of these things. I am going to send you what my Father has promised; but stay in the city until When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money, telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep.’” Meanwhile, Thomas (called Didymus), one of the Twelve, was not with the disciples when Jesus came. So the other disciples told him, "We have seen the Lord!" But he said to them, “Unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it.” They will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all; they will place their hands on sick people, and they will get well. A week later his disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was with them; though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!” When he had led them out to the vicinity of Bethany, he lifted up his hands and blessed them, while he was blessing them he left them and was taken up into heaven. Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here; see my hands. Reach out your hand and put it into my side. Stop doubting and believe,” and Thomas said to him, “My Lord and my God!” If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble. So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed, and this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day. After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and he sat at the right hand of God. Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go, and when they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted, and then they returned to Jerusalem with great joy, staying continually at the temple, praising God, and after that they began to preach everywhere, and the Lord worked with them and confirmed his word by the signs that accompanied it. Then Jesus told him, “Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed,” and he did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book. He came to them and said, "All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you,” adding that “surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age.” Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book.
